causality is inferred, not observed
 - we observe instances not a concept

Causal reasoning through statistical analysis


Types of Causal Reasoning

partial or contributory cause
example: driver inattention and a car crash on a freeway
example: coral reefs are declining due to global warming, water pollution, and human contact

necessary cause: a condition that must be present in order for the effect to occur
example: a college degree is a prerequisite for certain jobs
example: to be eligible for social security benefits one must be a certain age.

sufficient cause: a condition capable of bringing about the effect in and of itself
example: a blood alcohol level > .08 is sufficient for a DUI conviction
example: having unprotected sex one time is sufficient for contracting HIV

necessary versus sufficient: the distinction
A necessary condition for the occurrence of an effect is a state of affairs without which the effect cannot occur, while a sufficient condition is a state of affairs that guarantees the effect will happen.

sole cause (both necessary and sufficient)
extremely rare in public, social controversies
beware of arguers who use “scapegoating” by pinning all of society’s problems on a single cause
example: recent lawsuits alleging McDonald’s was the sole cause of a person’s obesity
example: global warming isn’t the sole cause of the decline of coral reefs
example: As a condition of the Versailles treaty, Germany was required to accept sole responsibility for causing World War I. 

effect-to-cause reasoning (a form of “sign” reasoning)
looking at effects or symptoms and inferring back to their cause
example: You have a fever, so you may have an infection.
example: All the flags are flying at half mast, so it must be due to a national tragedy.
example: Jake slammed the door when he came in so he’s probably in a bad mood.

reciprocal causation: two things are both causes and effects of each other
example: stuttering and shyness
example: the United States’ policy toward Mexico and Mexico’s policy toward the U.S.
example: couples’ conflicts “I read the paper because you never stop talking.” “I talk because you won’t stop reading the paper.”
causal “chain” or multi-step causation
Will Viagra help save endangered species? (Associated Press, December 26, 2002)
Does media reporting about famous people who commit suicide produce “imitation” suicides? (New England Journal of Medicine, September 11, 1986)
1% increase in unemployment “causes” 10,000 fatalities (Annual Review of Public Health, 1996, 17:449-65. )


 